Title:  An Affirmative Way Forward
Focus:  A quick look at Affirm as a modern mobile application-based payment platform and its impact so far

The development of modern online Point of Sale (POS) technology has been the most rapidly growing branch of the eCommerce industry since the founding and public renown of web-based services (such as “ebay” in 1995) that the average consumer can now access from the palm of their hand.  The progressive evolution of this technological archetype has enabled consumers to reliably purchase goods and services with ever increasing efficiency and convenience and appears to be here to stay (History of E-Commerce | George Washington University (gwu.edu)).

Fortunately, the scramble to find evermore innovative means to further the digital age hasn’t shown any signs of stopping.  In light of the near limitless opportunity that companies now actively use to approach target market, it would seem that consumer expectations have vastly exceeded most market projection as well.  Demand exceeding supply always puts an unsettling amount of pressure on any business and is historically known to hinder ability to operate sustainably over time.  This has driven pursuit for businesses (globally) to constantly seek out more effective and creative means to improve overall quality of the customer interface experience and has thereby opened the door for those seeking to pioneer a solution to the biggest related hurdle involved – Payment Method. (The Evolution of the POS (cdesolutions.com))
Since being founded in 2012, and launching in 2014, Affirm Inc. has positioned itself to take any tasks tied to this problem off the corporate “To-Do” list.  Affirm provides a digital platform for credit intermediation that is both easily accessed and managed.  Just by opening a mobile app, any qualified customer can login to their account to then request and receive a loan in under 5 minutes at the push of a button.  Provided they accept the terms of service, predetermined by the payment package they’ve qualified for, they can also continue to request loans (with limits determined on case-by-case basis) provided they haven’t fallen into delinquent status on a prior one. Affirm has marketed this benefit most strongly to the “Millennial” and “Z” generations as well as others who may have not yet had the opportunity to develop a strong credit history; yet would also have enough exposure to modern mobile payment technologies to consistently use them (About Us (affirm.com)).

The idea was initially developed by Founder & CEO Max Levchin (with backing of Co-Founders Nathan Gettings, Jeffrey Kaditz and Alex Rampell) who describes his inspiration as a way to improve the modern credit networking options for future generations.  The business aims to provide a more secure, innovative and flexible array of digital purchasing options to meet the increased quantity of orders placed by the global e-commerce customer base (especially across the Millennial and Gen-Z generations) that the major online retailers are procuring (Inside The Billion-Dollar Plan To Kill Credit Cards (forbes.com)). Today all Affirm loan services and corresponding terms can only be tendered to US and CA residents who qualify.  Customer qualification is measured by acceptable credit score and other variables unique to each customer.  Since Affirm does not issue late or deferred/compound interest fees to customers it strongly depends on customer ability to consistently align payments with pre-determined due dates (Affirm CEO Levchin is open to regulation as travel spending rises — Quartz (qz.com)).

The “Buy Now, Pay Later” business model (BNPL) is most greatly benefits consumers who don’t yet have a developed credit profile a means to start enhancing their credit score.  This model has created a powerful market that was valued around $90.69 billion in 2020 with projection to reach $3.98 trillion by 2030 – based on current Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 45.7% between 2021 and 2030.  End-user market research also suggests that Affirm’s aforementioned target market aligns with the “Generation Z/Millennial” as majority of related consumer base that is expected to continue invoking “lucrative opportunities for growth” in the BNPL market with the upcoming “Generation X” expected to contribute to the most rapid growth to date (Buy Now Pay Later Market Size, Global Trends, Report 2030 (valuates.com)).

As of January 2021, Affirm is a publicly traded company that yields monetary gains from three profiles: Customer Revenue, Merchants, and Investors.  Being their most prominent source of revenue, a majority of Affirm loans are issued with pre-determined, and fully disclosed, prospective interest rates, merchant transaction facilitation, and end-to-end loan servicing.  Like a standard creditor, Affirm also sells the debt against their loans and makes most of their money from fixed interest rates applied to principal due by consumer (How Affirm Makes Money: 5 Ways (AFRM) | Seeking Alpha).

Since going public Affirm (under Affirm Holdings Inc.) came out the gate trading at $49/share shooting upwards of around $160+/share by November 2021.  Unfortunately, their stock price has trended down to around $22/share currently making it a very volatile stock under current market conditions.  A contributor to this outcome seems to be an increase in delinquency that is currently being attributed to a concurrent state of recession (Here's Why Affirm's Stock Fell 13% in August | The Motley Fool). Regardless Affirm has reported increases in both earnings and customer base at end of third quarter in 2022.  According to their latest press release, their gross merchandise value (GMV) saw an increase of 73% and currently holds at approximately $3.9 billion with active consumer and transaction iteration growth of 137% and 162% respectively.  Though they endured $17.3 million more in operating loss their overall net loss was reduced by $232.4 million since third quarter of 2021 (Affirm Reports Fiscal Year 2022 Third Quarter Results | Affirm Holdings, Inc.).  While purely speculative, this could indicate that a steadily progressive turnaround remains in sight within the next year.

The credit intermediary business (wherein small loan issuers procure sale of debt with expected returns at principal with consideration to prospective interest rates) continues to be a big contributor to the tightly knit evolution of both digital finance and technology.  However, like with all other evolving facets of the FinTech industry, there are an equally prevalent presence of competitors.  These include (but are not limited to) companies such as Klarna, Sezzle, Afterpay, and Paypal.  Some of these competitors offer an interesting and diverse array of payment options that Affirm currently does not.
One example of this would be Klarna’s consumer option to split their payments into 4 installments with the first being due right away and the others due at 2-week intervals. Also with Klarna, interest rates are capped at 24.99%; which is lower than the 30% you would find with Affirm.  (12 Companies Like Affirm 2022 - Rigorous Themes)

With respect to all the aforementioned details concerning the current opportunities and challenges being faced within the credit intermediary market, I think it fair to say that Affirm would benefit from implementing a series of strategic adjustments.  To start, since their return-customer base remains strong, an expanded marketing plan to reach new consumers should be implemented as soon as possible. Secondly, in keeping with common ESG standards, Affirm might benefit from building a more diverse subset of contributions toward prevalent cultural movements into their social impact initiatives (such as promotional packages and/or interest reduction for military veterans and/or minority-owned businesses).  Regardless of which company the consumer choses to deal with or which strategies a company chooses to instill into their business model, the ultimately substantiating fact of the matter is that the BNPL system continues to drive the advancement of the FinTech industry forward.  There is surely still much to see and learn as the digital age continues to drive a deeper and more meaningful degree of human creativity and innovation as the everchanging economy continues.


Sources:
-	History of E-Commerce | George Washington University (gwu.edu)
-	The Evolution of the POS (cdesolutions.com)
-	About Us (affirm.com)
-	Inside The Billion-Dollar Plan To Kill Credit Cards (forbes.com)
-	Affirm CEO Levchin is open to regulation as travel spending rises — Quartz (qz.com)
-	Buy Now Pay Later Market Size, Global Trends, Report 2030 (valuates.com)
-	How Affirm Makes Money: 5 Ways (AFRM) | Seeking Alpha
-	Here's Why Affirm's Stock Fell 13% in August | The Motley Fool
-	Affirm Reports Fiscal Year 2022 Third Quarter Results | Affirm Holdings, Inc.
-	12 Companies Like Affirm 2022 - Rigorous Themes
